---
layout: post
title:  "DARIA"
dek:    "A case management system for abortion funds"
date:   2019-01-01 00:00:00 -0000
categories: project
excerpt: "I led an open source, all-volunteer project to get the DC Abortion Fund's intake out of a massive spreadsheet starting in 2015. Since then it's expanded to multiple other abortion funds, and those funds have responded in interesting ways."
url: "https://github.com/DCAFEngineering/dcaf_case_management"
---

The DC Abortion Fund (DCAF) is an all-volunteer organization serving people who want abortions but can't afford them on their own by cutting individual people checks, and who live in or are traveling to the metro DC area. (It's a little more complicated than that, but that explanation works for now.) It's part of a wider network of abortion funds that operate independently. The DC area is fortunate enough to have a lot of abortion providers, and so DCAF has spent more money on abortions every year for several years running.

When I joined the DC Abortion Fund board of directors in 2013, it was starting to become apparent that the steady increased need was not going to settle down. In response, we had increased our fundraising efforts to be able to serve a higher volume of patients with higher levels of cash, but the system we were using to manage that intake had been scaled as far as they were going to go.

That system was a series of spreadsheets organized by patient geography, which had served us well for awhile, but which had really begun to creak. It made it difficult for multiple people working in a geography to work at the same time; intake volunteers overwriting each others' hard work was a semi-regular occurrence. As the volume increased, so did the agony of intake volunteers. DCAF had gotten to a point where the need for some systems change was great enough that they were ready to switch to something, and it had fallen on me as the board technologist to make that happen.

A core team began working with Code for DC, our local Code for America chapter, in the summer of 2015. We ran with a leadership team of a lead designer, a lead engineer (me), and two volunteers from the DC Abortion Fund who agreed to serve as consultants and liaisons. We planned for a few months, began programming on what would become DARIA in December of 2015, launched a pilot in July 2016, and had fully rolled out to the organization as the case management system of record in December 2016.

There are a couple things about this project that I think are special or particularly interesting. The first is that, in keeping with DCAF's and Code for DC's all-volunteer approach, we built a very reliable and



The first is that we built this on a stack of Rails defaults, which wound up being integral to our success. With the exception of our database backend, 

We built it on a stack of Rails defaults, which I think wound up being fairly integral to our success. We 



-- some stuff about code for dc and all volunteer stuff


-- some stuff about impact

-- some stuff about bad decisions in retro
